F50 pros and cons vs F40:

The front and rear views are definately cooler on the F50, but I think I like the F40 side view better. I haven't taken the top off the F50 yet, though (its supposed to be a 40 minute job..).

Adjustable front suspension. Press a button and it raises two inches, which means you can actually drive it up into strip malls. The F40 had to be driven into my garage at an angle to keep the front from rubbing. This makes the car actually fairly practical for daily driving.

Drastically better off idle torque. You have to rev the F40 a fair amount to even get it moving, and if you are moving at 2000 rpm in first gear, a honda can pull away from you until it starts making boost at 3500 rpm. The f50 has enough torque that you don't even need to rev to get moving, and it goes quite well by just flooring it after you are moving. No need to wreck a clutch by slipping it out from 4000 rpm.

Much nicer clutch. The F40 clutch was a very low-tech single disk clutch that required more effort than on my crazy TR with over twice the torque.

Better rearward visibility. The F40's lexan fastback made everything to your rear a blur.

Better shifting. A much smoother six speed than the F40's five speed.

Better suspension. Some bumps that would upset the F40 badly are handled without any problems.

Better aerodynamics. A flat underbody with tunnels is a good thing if you are going to be moving at very high speeds.

I beleive the F50 could probably lap a road coarse faster than the F40, but in a straight line, the F40 is faster. The F50 felt a fair amount slower, but I was chalking that up to the lack of non-linear turbo rush. Today I drove it down to the dyno and we got real numbers.

It only made 385 hp at the rear wheels, which is maybe 450 at the crank if you are being generous. The F40 made 415, but that was with the boost cranked up a bit over stock.

We're going to have to do something about that.

I'm thinking that a mild twin-turbo job will do the trick. Six pounds of boost should get it up to a health 500 hp at the rear wheels, which will keep me happy. I don't want to turn it into a science project like my TR, I just want to make sure it is well out of the range of any normal cars.

I may put that in line after my GTO gets finished.